human rights groups have accused Israeli
forces of using the chemical white
phosphorus in Gaza and Lebanon Amnesty
International says it's verified videos
showing white phosphorus artillery
shells being fired by the Israeli Army
into civilian areas in Gaza its use in
densely populated areas is considered a
war crime white phosphorus is used as a
smoke screen or as a weapon it ignites
when exposed to air and it can burn
through flesh causing horrific
deformities we're going to bring in
Donatella rera she's Amnesty
International senior crisis advisor and
she investigates war crimes and human
rights abuses she's joining us now from
Dhaka thank you very much indeed for
being with us um how do you gather the
evidence for this first of
all uh with the verified videos and uh
still images uh showing the Israeli
positions located just north of the Gaza
Strip um near theot where um we saw um
in images taken by um G photographer um
Israeli military position with a hitzer
a 109 hitzer uh that fires
155 uh millim shells artillery shells um
and with uh artillery shells containing
white phosphorus uh uh at the ready and
at the same time we've verified videos
showing
uh artillery shells um being air bursted
with white phosphorus uh over Gaza City
in at least two uh different locations
now the Israeli military may say that um
although they haven't commented on this
that they would be using it as um uh as
a smoke screen for example which is one
of the uses it it can be put to what is
your interpretation of the pictures that
makes you think that it was actually be
used being used in a different
fashion
um of course uh white phosphorus uh can
and is often used as a smoke screen but
that is um uh a use for the battlefield
and uh not for areas that are populated
by civilians densely populated with
civilian the Gaza Strip is one of the
most densely populated territories in
the world so uh white phosphorus should
not be used uh in the gasa strip where
there are uh so many civilians uh and
and this is the areas where we veryify
the videos in Gaza City um the harbor
area and the zun neighborhood uh these
are areas that were full of civilians so
we're not talking about some uh
locations which are a battlefield devoid
of Civilian population do you have any
evidence uh to suggest that anybody has
actually been harmed by
this uh we do not at the moment and we
have not suggested that we do uh we note
of course that the medical facilities
are under terrible strain uh and so we
you know we have not heard of of any
civilians having been harmed at this
stage um the fact with white phosphorus
though and we saw that very clearly when
white phosphorus was used with
devastating effects previously in the
2008 2009
uh conflict when it was used it took
sometimes for for doctors to recognize
the burns as having been from white
phosphorus because at the time the
Israeli authorities were denying having
used it in the meantime patients died
white phosphorus can remain alive um
hidden under soil or Rubble basically it
it burns at a very high temperature when
it comes into contact with air so um I
myself so in Gaza at the time um white
phosphorous soaked wedges that had been
um airburst from artillery by Israeli
forces into Gaza that were hidden under
sand under soil and then uh children and
and other passers by kicked them
accidentally as they passed days and
even weeks after and of course as soon
as those came into contact with air they
reignited and that's how people got
burned I understand amnesty is
continuing to collect evidence of this
what do you want to be done with the
evidence that you've brought pulled
together well this is just one of the
one of the uh concerns one of the
violations that we are uh investigating
um you know we're investigating uh
indiscriminate bombardments that are
continuing to kill uh civilians in very
large numbers uh entire families are
being uh killed um by bombardments on
their homes uh where the inhabitants of
those homes and the neighbors are killed
and injured in very large numbers uh and
so this is uh you know part of the
evidence that we are collecting of
course the first uh and most important
and most crucial steps that needs to be
taken is that such attacks that are so
disproportionate and indiscriminating
nature must stop immediately because the
number of victims every day is is
enormous and and secondly uh of course
those who are responsible for committing
violations of international humanitarian
law some of which amount to war crimes
should be held accountable Donatella
rera is amnesty International's senior
crisis advisor we appreciate you being
with us on Al M thank you very much
indeed for your
time thank you